# Petal (Calyx Profiler) Evaluation

This repository contains the evaluation materials for our OOPSLA 2026 paper, "Understanding Accelerator Compilers via Performance Profiling".

The evaluation consists of reproduction of figures and performance claims made in the paper, which introduces Petal, a profiler for The Calyx Infrastructure.

**Goals:** There are two goals for this artifact evaluation:
1. To reproduce the flame graphs, timeline views, and statistics tables generated by Petal in case studies.
2. To reproduce claims about Petal's
3. To demonstrate robustness of Petal.

## Prerequisites

The artifact is available in a Virtual Machine packaged as an OVA file, of which a permanent link is available [here](). We assume that you are using [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/). We also include instructions for building the virtual machine using Vagrant in the `vm` directory.

*Setup instructions once you are in the VM*: This should be run at the beginning of every terminal session.

0. The username is `vagrant`, and the password is `vagrant`.

1. Activate the Python virtual environment:
```
eval $( fud2 env activate )
```

2. If you have logged out since the last time you've run it, re-run the Vivado set-up script:

```
source ~/
```

3. Navigate to the evaluation directory by typing:
```
cd ~/calyx-profiler-eval
```

*Note that an internet connection is necessary for Vivado installation and for opening Perfetto UI to view timeline views*

# Kick the tires

### Petal's basic functionality

(1) Run Petal. In the terminal:
```
cd ~/calyx
mkdir svgs petal-runs
fud2 tests/correctness/pipelined-mac.futil -s svgs/pipelined-mac.svg --through profiler -s sim.data=tests/correctness/pipelined-mac.futil.data --dir petal-runs/pipelined-mac
```

(2) View the flame graph(s). A flattened flame graph should be created in `svgs/pipelined-mac.svg`. It should look like the below screenshot:

**TODO:INSERT IMAGE**


(3) View the timeline view

### Vivado kick-the-tires

# Step-by-step guide

- **Case study data creation**: Generate the figures found in the paper by running Petal.

- **Vivado Result reproduction**: Generate the synthesis results found in the paper.

- **Performance comparison**: Run experiments to reproduce Petal's performance (briefly described in Section 7).

- (Optional) **Profiling with Petal**: Obtain profiling figures from an example program and perform an optimization.

# Case Study Data Creation (Estimated time: TODO minutes)

Run the `run-case-studies.sh` script. This script runs Petal and Verilator in order to reproduce all resulting figures and cycle counts in the paper.

```
bash run-case-studies.sh
```

Logs will be written to the `case-studies/logs` directory, and the script will report if any run failed. On a new run of the script, results from previous files will be removed.

## Viewing Results

Results will be written to the `case-studies/results` directory. Each figure and table in the paper will have a counterpart file; for example, Figure 4's flame graph will be generated in `case-studies/results/fig-4.svg`. Note that colors in Petal's output could differ from colors used in the paper.

### Flame Graphs

Flame graphs are outputted as `*.svg` files. Use firefox to open a flame graph file.

ex)
```
firefox case-studies/results/fig-4.svg
```

### Timeline views

Timeline views are outputted as `*.pftrace` files that can be viewed in [Perfetto UI](https://ui.perfetto.dev/). Navigate to [https://ui.perfetto.dev/](https://ui.perfetto.dev/) in the firefox browser, and then click on `Open trace file` in the left navigation bar.

*Key notes for navigation*
- Each "milisecond" on the Perfetto view represents a cycle.
- Press `W` for zooming in, `A` for navigating left, `D` for navigating right, and `S` for zooming out.
- _Calyx timeline views_: There is a dropdown for each cell in the program. If the cell contains control groups, there will be another dropdown that contains all of the control groups,
- _Dahlia timeline views_: Each code block (`for`, `if`) will have a corresponding dropdown.

Many timeline view figures were based on a "zoomed-in" view. Here is a guide on how to get the picture represented in each figure:
- Figure 5: Open the `toplevel.main` dropdown and its `Control Groups` dropdown.
- Figure 9d: Open the `toplevel.main` dropdown.
- Figure 9e: Open the `main` dropdown and its `BL0005: for (let k: ubit<4> = 0..2)` dropdown.
- Figure 11a: 

# Vivado Results

# Performance comparison (Estimated time: TODO minutes)

Run the `reproduce-performance.sh` script

# (optional) Profiling with Petal



## Outline: Figures and numbers to reproduce

- Section 3
  - Original vs new cycle counts
  - Figure 4: switch-case example flame graph
  - Figure 5: switch-case example timeline view
- Section 7
  - Petal profiling performance
    - # of probes
    - Time to obtain RTL trace with instrumentation probes
    - Trace reconstruction time
- Section 8
  - Figure 9d: Calyx timeline view for example Dahlia program
  - Figure 9e: Dahlia timeline view for example Dahlia program
- Section 9
  - Section 9.1: static promotion with linear-algebra-2mm
    - Figure 11a: Zoomed in timeline view without static promotion
    - Figure 11c: Zoomed in timeline view with static promotion
  - Section 9.2: resource sharing with linear-algebra-3mm
    - Figure 12a: Full timeline view for linear-algebra-3mm with resource sharing
    - Figure 12b: Full timeline view for linear-algebra-3mm without resource sharing
- Section 10
  - Section 10.1: ffnn
    - Original cycle count
    - Optimized cycle count
    - Figure 13a: Zoomed in timeline view before optimization
    - Figure 13b: Zoomed in timeline view after optimization
    - Table 1: Snippet of group statistics obtained from ffnn (bb_1-6)
  - Section 10.2: Packet scheduling
    - Original cycle count
    - Figure 14a: Flame graph of original program
    - Figure 14b: Zoomed in timeline view of original program
    - Figure 17a: Timeline view of example while program
    - Figure 17b: Timeline view of manually transformed while program
    - Figure 17c: Timeline view of par optimized while program
    - Table 2: optimization strategies and number of cycle reductions they made on packet scheduling queues
    - Vivado:
      - worst slack
      - area - LUT decrease
- Section 11: Dahlia Sandpile example
    - Original cycle count
    - Optimized program cycle count
    - Figure 18a: Flame graph of original sandpile program
    - Figure 18b: Timeline view of inner for loop iteration in the original program
    - Figure 18c: Timeline view of inner for loop iteration in optimized program
    - Vivado (for both programs)
      - worst slack
      - area - LUT increase

# Performance Experiments

